In this class we will learn
how a product evolves throughout
its life, from birth
to death.
We will look at a model that
is the product’s life cycle.
It is a very well-known theoretical
model and you have to know that
what it does is to describe or
anticipate or predict the stages
or phases through which every
product passes and how it works
in each of those stages, how sales
work, how competition works,
what decisions the companies
that are inside have to
take, etc.
Knowing well and understanding
the product life cycle helps
to understand how a business generally
works and how the competitive
environment works.
I want you to understand that when
we talk about a product we are not
talking about the product itself,
we can apply it to a category
of products, we can apply a brand,
we can apply it to a business
in general.
Here is the graphic representation
of the life cycle.
As you can see, we will draw
a curve with the evolution
of sales over time.
There are four phases.
The introduction phase, the growth
phase, the maturity phase and
the decline phase.
Sales at the beginning of the introduction
phase are growing slowly.
Really the demand has not yet validated
the product.
There are few buyers, maybe
a few early adopters.
Later, a few years later or a
time later, because the duration
of the phases is very variable,
depending on each
product, we enter a growth phase.
Sales are shaking, demand is shaking,
a lot more people, millions
of people are incorporated into
demand.
And then there comes a maturity
phase because that market
cannot grow endlessly.
A time comes when all demand
has accessed that product
and from that moment sales
grow vegetatively, by pure
renewal.
And there comes a time when products
enter the decline phase.
Because there are substitute
technologies or changes in
tastes or consumer patterns,
there are a number of circumstances
that make demand slow
down a lot.
Let’s look at the evolution of the
life cycle, for example, with
a product like tablets.
Remember when Apple started promoting
its iPad.
We are talking about the introduction phase.
There were a lot of skeptical people.
People say, but what is
it for?
Very few people bought at
the beginning, the first months.
The introductory phase, as
we see, the sales curve was very
flat.
But suddenly it seems that the market
started to convince the general public.
He was shot and entered the growth phase.
Sales went up for a year or
two, maybe two years and
more competitors entered.
But there came a time when the market
could not grow any more.
In almost every household that was
targeted public already had a tablet
and is currently in the maturity
phase.
It is no longer growing like during
those two years when sales shot.
It is in the maturity phase and will continue
for a long time.
Now it is a normal, stable, mature
market and will come a day when it
enters a decline phase because there
will be technology that is substitutive.
It is still a long time, but it
will come someday.
In the introductory phase, we could
say that there are current technologies
such as augmented reality or
virtual reality or 3D printing.
They are very likely to
be mass-use technologies in a
while, but they are still in the
introduction phase.
In the growth phase, we could
say smartwatches, for example,
are not selling as much as
you might expect, but well,
they are in the growth phase.
Every day we see more.
A product that is
clearly in the growth
phase is the electric car, which,
like smartwatches, was probably
expected to be more vertical,
but there are a number
of circumstances that
slow it down.
There are many sectors in maturity.
Smartphones are in the maturity
phase or traditional sectors like
fashion, for example.
And in the decline phase, let’s see
some example of a very drastic
decline, DVDs.
Technology changes and there
are products like the DVD that are almost
unusable or the fixed phone.
Every day it is used less.
I want us to analyze the life
cycle from a number of different
perspectives.
It will be very enriching.
We will see how the profitability
of companies evolves as they
advance in the life cycle,
the profitability is very
related to unit costs.
In the introduction phase, you
think that when a new product comes
out to the market, companies still
do not benefit from economies
of scale, manufacture in small
sizes and also have little
time with those technologies,
so they are not efficient.
The unit costs are very high and
the profitability is very low.
He also thinks that those companies
are doing what they are investing
a lot to grow, so at that time
they are not profitable.
Profitability is achieved in
the growth phases, when sales
are rising a lot.
Companies begin to be profitable
there and in the maturity
phase the competitors who
remain in the market, those who
are made with a good market
share become very large companies,
with huge economies of scale
and usually very profitable.
Now we are in the smartphone
market.
There have been many big and
probably profitable.
We will finally examine how
the competitive strategy works
throughout the life cycle.
We’ll see how many competitors there
are in each phase and how they have
to compete, what they have to focus on.
In the introduction phase, if you think
of it, there are usually very few
competitors, sometimes there is only
one, it is the one who has innovated,
the one who has created the product.
At that time, the competitors
who are present in the market what
they have to do is spend a lot
of money in marketing to make
this product known because
still very few people know
it and there comes a time when
sales start to grow.
The lawsuit has validated that
product and has validated that it
is willing to pay for it.
Sales are growing, profits
are growing, and what’s happening?
It always happens the same, because there
are other companies that are attracted
by that profitability and by that
business opportunity to enter the market.
When sales of the iPad jumped,
other technology manufacturers
began to manufacture tablets.
At this stage, it is still
a great growth potential.
The challenge here is to invest a lot in
marketing to grow as much as possible
and in addition is that you can do
so, that is, the investment is very
profitable because there is still potential.
Invest, grow, invest, grow, it
is like a race, it is like a race
to reach the maturity phase in that
of the maturity phase because it
is convenient to invest long before
reaching maturity because it
is easier to grow in this phase
that there is still potential
for growth, but then we arrive
in the maturity phase.
In the maturity phase we already
know what the size of the market
is that a cake is distributed
among different competitors.
Growing in this environment is
much more complicated because you
have to steal it from the competition
and then here is when we talk
about a red ocean, the competitive
war is much greater, price
wars, micro segmentation,
continuing need for differentiation
or product development,
etc.
What happens in mature markets is
that there are companies that become
very large, others disappear
and some remain with niches,
they become profitable in niches.
Large companies with a high
market share usually
become highly profitable
companies.
Finally we reach the cleave phase.
At this point things get ugly because
the product is almost no longer
in demand in the market.
Companies have to do it or they are able
to reinvent themselves or they have
to go out because otherwise they
will all die.